========
Overview
========
The Stormwater Emergency Response Tool and Optimizer (SERTO) is a Python package designed to facilitate the use of the United States Environmental Protection Agencies’ (EPA) '"Storm Water Management Model" <https://www.epa.gov/water-research/storm-water-management-model-swmm>'_ (SWMM) in solving optimization problems. The Homeland Security Research Program at EPA creates tools that assist emergency planners, responders, and utilities to prepare for and recover from catastrophic contamination incidences. SERTO is intended to assist in designing stormwater monitoring networks to detect contamination and assist in siting infrastructure such as real time control sensors and stormwater control measures.

Unique aspects of an insidious wide area chemical, biological, or radiological (CBR) incident necessitate stormwater system tools to inform preparations and recovery after an attack. This includes an unpredictable starting location of the pollution, contaminants that are acutely dangerous, and boundaries that may shift due to stormwater transport. The number of samplers/sensors available for monitoring a stormwater network is also often constrained due to feasibility (i.e., economic and installation) and generating the ensemble of stormwater model runs to plan for the stochastic processes involved can be burdensome. Detecting where contamination has occurred as soon as possible can aid in strategic decisions such as where to install treatment devices and stage waste. However, many stormwater utilities saddled by day-to-day operations do not invest in this type of planning since a tool designed for these scenarios has been unavailable for stormwater systems. 

SERTO builds upon a robust history of optimization tools developed by the EPA for emergency response and stormwater control measure siting to fill this gap. It is inspired by two deprecated EPA tools: TEVA-SPOT and SUSTAIN. TEVA-SPOT was developed from 2005-2011 by EPA and partners as a suite of sensor placement tools for drinking water distribution networks. The TEVA portion of the tool managed the ensemble of model runs and the SPOT portion of the tool the sensor placement optimization functionality. “SPOT” was later developed by Sandia National Laboratories into a network agnostic sensor placement optimization package called Chama that is included in SERTO. On the other hand, SUSTAIN was developed by EPA until 2014. Amongst its’ functionality, it allowed utilities to use transport algorithms from SWMM and two search algorithms to identify cost-effectiveness curves for stormwater best management practices.  SERTO was designed to ease the burden in optimizing the placement of resources within a stormwater collection system by coupling SWMM with existing optimization packages and providing support in generating and managing ensembles of model runs. SERTO currently contains the following functionality:

Ensemble Manager
================
SERTO includes an ensemble manager that builds a set of SWMM input files and precomputes simulation results for use by the optimization packages. The conditions varied in the SWMM input files can be set directly from a list of options (e.g., rainfall time series, pollutant starting amount, and plume conditions) or can be implemented using a custom python script to systematically change a SWMM model input file. A contaminant plume feature (specified or gaussian) has been included to vary sub catchment pollutant loadings in a manner representative of deposition from an airborne CBR incident. 
